[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
today is the last day
of our additive combinatorics
section of the class.
And we get to prove one
of the core theorems
of additive combinatorics, the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem.
And I think it's
a wonderful thing
and I will try to do it justice.
I'm learning myself also.
So first let me remind
everybody what it says.
All right.
So If A and B are
in an abelian group,
and let's say they
have size at most N,
and we have a subset of A
cross B, so a subset of pairs,
little a little b,
and it's pretty big.
So X is bigger than
k inverse n squared.
So k is a parameter here.
But you should think of k as
being significantly smaller
than n.
That's the regime where there's
a meaningful conclusion.
And pi 1 of X is at most K
So remember that pi 1 of X
is the set of a plus b
where a comma b is in X.
So this is surprisingly
small given how large X is.
And it means that
in this set there
are many pairs, a1, b1,
and a2, b2 that they add up
to the same number.
So there are a lot of additive
coincidences happening
when we add up the pairs in x.
Then the conclusion
is that there
is a subset A prime
in A, a subset B
prime in B, which
are pretty big.
So the way we'll say that
they're pretty big, so we could
say the following
is true that A and B
are each at least some
power of K times N.
So they're each pretty big.
But actually,
we'll say something
slightly fancier which is what
we really used in applications.
Namely if X prime
is defined to be
the part of X in A
prime times B prime,
then X prime is pretty big.
And also when you take sums
of A prime and B prime,
not just the ones in X
prime, but all of them,
those are all pretty small.
So A prime plus B
prime is less than K
to the big O of 1 times N.
So I guess last time we
introduced this and talked
about examples a little bit.
But let me just
repeat the example
because it helps a lot
to digest the statement.
So here is one example, A and
B are both the numbers up to N
with some garbage.
And then X could be
any subset of N cross
N, which is pretty big.
And so now it's not true
that A plus B is small,
but it is true that a good
maybe union a little bit.
OK, so pi 1 of X is
small because most of X
is contained in here, And
pi 1 of that is small.
So A plus B, it might be large.
But pi 1 of X is small.
And the only way
this can happen is
that in this case, a big
chunk of X, most of X
is contained in a product that
actually has a small subset.
So A prime equals
B prime equals N.
Does the statement make sense?
All right, cool
I'll tell you a little bit
of history of this theorem.
So Balog and Szemeredi
were the first people
to think about this.
And they proved a
version of this theorem.
But in Balog and
Szemeredi's theorem,
this K to the minus big
O of one was much worse.
So here there was, in
Balog-Szemereri, there
was like 1 over
some function of K.
And over here in
Balog-Szemeredi,
there was some function of
K. And this function of k
was really terrible.
It was worse than a
tower of exponentials.
And it followed from something
called Szemeredi's regularity
lemma, which is a really
important qualitative
fact in graph theory
and combinatorics,
which has many consequences.
But it's well known that the
bounds in Szemeredi's regularity
lemma are really terrible.
And that's where these really
terrible bounds come from.
Now, in Szemeredi's
regularity lemma,
those really terrible
bounds are the best thing
that's true, more or less.
But in some of the
applications they're not.
And Gowers revisited this.
And he proved that this thing
with the polynomial dependence.
So the proof that I'm going
to show you is from the 1990s.
So it's really not that old.
It's been very influential.
And it's not that complicated.
It's clever, but it's something
that we can do in a class
and this is a significant thing.
And I think it's something worth
seeing and worth knowing about.
All right.
So any questions or comments
before we start the proof?
So X is a subset of
A cross B. And we're
going to visualize it
as a bipartite graph,
and visualize X, which
is a subset of A cross B.
So over here, I
have A which I'll
visualize as a bunch of dots.
Over here I'll
have B, which I'll
visualize as a bunch of dots.
And if A comma B is in X,
then I will visualize that
by drawing an edge from
A to B. So the set X
will look something like this.
So in this picture,
A comma B is in X,
if and only if, I have an edge.
And now it turns out
to be a nice connection
between some graph
theory things you
can see in this graph and the
additive combinatorics of A
and B. So let me make
a definition that P sub
K of a to b is the number
of paths that have length K
and they go from a to b.
And their paths are in this
graph, in the graphics.
I had to take P3 of A comma.
B is going to be very
important in our story.
How many ways are there to get
from A to B in three steps?
So there may not be any
in the picture right now.
Let me add an edge.
So there's one way to get
from A to B in three steps.
And here's another way to get
P3 of AB is counting how many
ways there are to do that.
All right.
So here's a lemma.
AUDIENCE: Can I have a question?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Are the [INAUDIBLE]
allowed to repeat notes?
LAWRENCE GUTH: They are
allowed to repeat notes.
Yeah, you're right.
So they might have been
some I didn't count before.
So that is also a path of
length 3 from A to B. Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So if I have A prime
in A and B prime in B,
if you look where
we want to go, we'd
like to eventually
prove that for some
sets that we haven't found
yet that A prime plus B
prime is small.
So how are we going
to prove that?
A prime plus B prime, the
size of A prime plus B prime
is going to be related to the
paths of length 3 in this graph.
So if I have this and if for
every pair A and B, A and A
prime, and B and B prime--
there are lots of
paths between them.
Then A prime plus B
prime isn't very big.
It's less than pi 1
of X cubed over p.
So let's prove this lemma.
All right.
So let's visualize a path
of length 3 from A to B.
So it looks like this.
There's a path of length 3.
And what is this telling us?
Well, this edge tells me that
A comma B1 is in x, right?
Hence therefore, A
plus B1 is in pi 1
of X. And this edge tells me
similarly that A1 plus B1 is
in pi 1 of X. And this
edge tells me similarly
that A1 plus B is in pi 1 of X.
Now I'm interested in
A plus B. And A plus B
is related to these guys, and
so we can write A plus B as A
plus B1 minus A1 plus B1 plus
A1 plus B. Did I do this right?
So A plus B, the A1's
cancel and the B1's cancel.
And these three characters, they
correspond to these three edges.
So let's call this
Z1, Z2, and Z3,
So we have seen that
the number of triples--
Z1, Z2, Z3, and pi 1 of
x cubed, so that A plus B
is Z1 minus Z2 plus Z3.
That number of triples
is at least P3 A to B.
So if there are a lot of
paths from A to B of length 3,
then there are a lot of ways of
writing A plus B by combining
guys in pi 1 of X. All right.
And we're supposing that P3
of a, b is always at least P.
So we have this.
And then we can
conclude from this
that the size of A plus B times
P is at most pi 1 of X cubed.
Because for every
sum in A plus B,
I can write this sum as Z1
minus Z2 plus Z3 at least
p different ways.
And for each Z1,
Z2, and Z3, this
is only going to give
me one number when I do.
AUDIENCE: That's A prime
and B prime, right?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Those are A
prime and B prime, right.
So I'm digesting
along with all of you.
And as I've been
reading the proof,
I've been trying to
figure out how did people
think to do this and do
these different things.
So let's try to give
some big-picture strategy
while we might look at this.
So pi 1 of X is small.
That tells us that there
are a lot of coincidences
where you can write
a number as A plus B
in a lot of different ways.
And how might that be helpful?
So the fact that
pi 1 of X is small,
that tells us that there are
going to be a lot of edges.
What do I say?
So by assumption there are a
lot of edges in this graph.
That's one of our
hypotheses that X is big.
So there are a lot of
edges in this graph.
And therefore there
are lots of this paths
of length 3 in this graph.
We'll figure that out later.
And when there are
many different paths
of length 3 between
these two guys,
then it means that
there are lots
of ways of representing A plus B
by combining guys in pi 1 of X.
On the other hand, if
pi 1 of X is small,
then that should make
this not too large.
OK.
I don't think that
really explained
how somebody might have
thought to do this,
but it's fairly short,
let's take a second and see.
I'll let you digest
a little bit and see
if people have anything to add.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: The idea of the paths
of three different things,
looks kind of like you're
taking A minus A plus A
and being similar to the kind
of continuous structure idea.
Is there a length
to those theorems?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah so the
question is this felt a little
bit like [? plunica ?]
and is there a link
to the [? plunicane ?] equality.
Maybe Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Is there something
special about paths of length 3?
It seems like this should work
for any odd number of paths.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah OK.
So the question is, why did
we pick paths of length three.
There's really nothing special
about paths of length 3.
It would be some similar
estimate for any length.
And 3 is the length where the
later part of the proof, we
managed to get it to work.
OK.
So next, let's think a
bit about how many edges
there are in this graph
and how many paths there
are of length 2, and how many
paths there are of length 3,
and stuff.
Let's just orient
ourselves to this graph.
So OK, I'll call this some basic
estimates and PK, PK of AB.
Actually, let me
frame it this way.
Let me state a lemma
about paths of length 3.
And then we'll start to
do some things about that.
So to finish the proof of
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
there's a key lemma.
And it's just a lemma
in graph theory.
So all of the additive
structure went
into writing this and
noticing that things cancel.
And now we have our
graph theory lemma
about paths of
length 3 in a graph.
So the main lemma
says that if X is in.
A cross B that X is bigger
than K inverse times the size
of A times the size of B.
Then there are big sets with
lots of paths between them.
So then there exists A
prime in A and B prime
in B so that if
we define X prime
is the part of X in A
prime cross B prime,
then X prime is pretty big.
And for every A and
A prime and B and B
prime the number of length 3
paths from A to B is at least K
to the minus O of 1 A B.
So if you combine this
lemma and this key lemma,
and just put them together, you
get the Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
theorem.
And the reason
that 3 appears here
is it's the smallest number
where this key lemma is true.
So I'll let you in your mind
just fill in this is our P,
and fill it in for P over here,
and you do a little algebra,
and that's the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem.
So if it's OK with
everybody, I'm
going to erase this and
the rest of the class,
we just focus on proving
this lemma from graph theory,
with the rest of
the proof of BSG.
So let's orient ourselves a
little bit about how many paths
there are in this graph
between different points,
and prove some
simple things first
before we prove this lemma.
So I'll call this a simple
bounds about PK a, b.
All right.
So first let's think
about how many edges
there are in this graph.
So the number of
edges is the size
of X, which is at
least K inverse A B.
And then let's think
about how many paths there
are of different lengths.
So if I write PK
without an A or B,
this is the number
of paths of length K,
and they could start
or end anywhere.
But I will just
make the restriction
that they start
in A. It turns out
it's in a bipartite
graph It's simpler
to count things like this.
So P1 is just the number
of edges in the graph,
paths of length 1 are
just individual edges.
So this is the size of X, which
is at least K inverse A B. Now
a helpful thing to talk about is
the neighborhood of any vertex.
So if I have a
vertex A over here.
This is A and this is B.
I have vertex A over here.
There are some edges
coming out of it.
And this set here is called
the neighborhood of A.
And you can do it in the
other directions also.
It's the neighborhood
of A. Yeah?
AUDIENCE: There's two
different K's up here, right?
LAWRENCE GUTH: There
are two different K's.
Yeah there are
two different K's.
I apologize.
Yeah.
Let's do this.
So P2, so that's the size of P1.
And then if I were to take
the average A and A of P1 of A
to anywhere, that would be
P1 divided by the size of A.
And so that would be at least
K inverse times the size of P.
So this is the
average degree of one
of these vertices on the left.
And it's at least
a decent fraction
of all the vertices
on the right.
All right.
Now let's think about
paths of length 2.
So P2, a path of length
2 looks like this.
So there's some guy B
that it goes through here,
and then there
has to be somebody
who goes to B and
somebody who comes from B.
So this is the sum over b
of the size of neighborhood
of b squared.
Well, if I just
were to take the sum
over b of the size
of neighborhood of b,
that would count the edges.
So whenever I'm interested in
the sum of somebody squared
and I have a nice formula
for the sum of somebody,
then it makes sense to
apply Cauchy-Schwarz.
So if you apply
Cauchy-Schwarz here,
you get the sum of N
of b quantity squared
over the size of b.
So that's at least K inverse
size of A size of B bar
all squared over the size of
B. And that works out to k
to the minus 2 A squared B.
Now that kind of makes sense.
So for reference, if we had
the complete graph with all
the edges, the number
of paths of length 2
would be A squared B.
You pick somebody in A,
you pick somebody in B,
you pick somebody in A.
And so this says that the
fraction of them is at least K
to the minus 2.
And that makes sense because
the fraction of edges
is K to the minus 1.
And we want two different
edges to both be in our path.
So that makes K to the minus
2 a good reference point.
And it's not necessarily
equal to that.
It's greater than
or equal to that.
And the reason is our edges
may not be distributed evenly.
So if some vertices have
way more edges than others,
that will cause the number of
paths of length 2 to go up.
And again, we can
take the average.
So if I were to take the
average over A1 and A2
of the number of
paths from a1 to a2,
that would be at least I
would divide by A squared.
So K to the minus 2 times B.
As an exercise you can keep
going to longer lengths.
So exercise is that P3 is
at least K to the minus 3
A squared B squared, A
squared B squared would
be the number of paths of
length 3 in the complete graph,
and at least K to the
minus 3, a fraction of them
are paths in our smaller graph.
And that means that if I
take the average on A and B
of the number of paths of length
3 from a to b, that's at least K
to the minus 3 times A times B.
So if I pick two random vertices
and I count the number of
paths of length 3, on average,
it's at least this big.
Now let's compare
that to the key lemma.
The key Lemma says that I can
find some substantial subsets,
so that within these
substantial subsets,
the number of paths
of length 3 is always
K to the minus 100
size of A size of B.
So this number here is a
small fraction of the average.
I'm looking for pairs where
the number of paths of length 3
is at least a small
fraction of the average.
But the thing that
makes this tricky
is I don't want just like
some A's and B's or most
of the A's and B's to be
at least a small fraction
of the average.
I want actually, for every
A and B in our subset,
I want them to be at least
some fraction of the average.
So now we're eventually going
to go up to paths of length 3.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: For this one, we don't
need them to be all of them?
If 80% of A cross B had a
lot of paths between them,
then could we still not
have this [INAUDIBLE] hold
for just like a worse bound?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Great, OK.
So the question is in
this Lemma as written,
we have assumed that for every
A and B in A prime and B prime,
we have a lot of paths, which
then matches the key lemma.
But the question is, did we
really need that in this lemma?
Or could we have relaxed
a little bit over here?
So suppose instead of this lemma
that we only had this for most
A's and B's.
So let's do a little experiment.
So in blue, I'll
put an experiment.
And the experiment is
that instead of this, I'm
going to say for 90% of
pairs, a prime, b prime
and A prime cross B prime.
OK.
So now let's see
what would happen.
If I take an element of this
sum before I knew that--
so let's say a prime plus
b prime is in this sum.
And then I can say that then
I'm going to use this thing.
Now if I knew that 99%
of the guys in this sum
could be represented by a
good pair, a prime, b prime,
I would be happy.
But that's not what I have
written in my experiment.
So my anxiety is 90% of the a
primes and b primes are good.
They have lots of paths.
10% of them are bad.
But then I take the
sum set, and the 90%
produce a few sums, but the
10% produce a ton of sums.
I'll make a picture.
So here is A prime
cross B prime.
This part of it is good.
Good means that.
And here's the 10% That's bad.
Then I take the sum operation.
But now life changes.
So pi 1 of good is tiny.
Pi one of bad is huge.
All right.
And now I go down here.
And for each of these
sums, if the sums are good,
they get counted many times.
If sums are bad, they don't.
But this isn't going
to work if pi 1 is bad.
AUDIENCE: At this point, if
instead of assuming for 90%
if we assume that
the average is bigger
than p, then at this step, if
we added together every p in AB,
then would we get the same?
Will the sum of the three
AB over each AB would
be less than the guys
in pi 1 of X cubed,
and then the sum of them will be
the number of times the average?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah so
there's another suggestion,
but I think it's similar.
The other suggestion
was instead of a 90%
we could take the average
over a prime b prime.
Yeah.
But the issue is that when we
look sometimes at A prime cross
B prime and sometimes we
look at a prime plus b prime
and their notions of average
may be very different
from each other,
because there may
be a big chunk of A prime
cross B prime, which
is compressed a
lot when you add,
and another chunk which is not.
So when you look at
a prime plus b prime,
we don't need every sum to
have a lot of representatives.
We just need most of them.
But it's hard to keep track of
the way A prime cross B prime is
related to a prime
plus b prime, and it
seems to be the case
that the easiest
way to know that most
of the sums are good
is to actually know that all of
A prime cross B prime is good.
Yeah.
OK.
Great questions.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Could you
get around this issue
by requiring that the bad
subset is asymptotically small,
that the size is 1 over the
square root of the size of A?
Because that way when you
project down, you'll square it,
but it will still
be relatively small.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
OK, so the comment
was that if we
were to replace 90%
by 1 minus epsilon,
and if we tuned epsilon to
be really, really small,
eventually this would work.
And that sounds right to me.
We'll keep our eye out
for the rest of the proof.
Perhaps, that will allow
us to simplify things.
But it might not.
Yeah.
OK, great.
So let's remember where we are.
We're trying to
prove the key lemma
that I can choose big subsets,
so that for every pair a and b,
there are lots of length
3 paths between them.
And for every, maybe we
could relax to almost every,
but anyway, it's not that hard.
It's actually not that hard
to prove these theorems.
OK.
So the reason we use 3
here is that, well, I
think that this is false with
2, if we replaced it with 2.
I don't quite have
a counterexample.
Buy still we're going
to warm up by talking
about paths of length
2 because they're
simpler than paths of length 3.
And we'll prove some weaker
version for paths of length 2
that we'll use as
a stepping stone.
So paths of length 2, so lemma,
If X is a subset of A cross B
and it's pretty big, and we
have a parameter epsilon bigger
than 0, Then I can
choose subsets.
It's actually just one
subset, just a subset A prime.
So that A prime is
pretty big and P2 of a1,
a2, is at least epsilon
K to the minus 2 times b.
Now, not for every pair a1, a2.
We're going to weaken
that a little bit,
but with an exceptional set of
only about an epsilon fraction.
So actually the
people who set this up
had the thought that was
similar to yours, which
is that let's allow an
epsilon fraction of bad pairs,
and we'll make that
a parameter, and then
we'll see what we can do.
And actually we put an epsilon
in two different places.
And so, all right, so
let's process this first.
Remember that the average
number of paths from a1 to a2.
If we average over
all the choices
a1 and a2 is at least this big.
So we're going to be at least an
epsilon fraction of the average.
And that's going to be
true not all the time but
except for about an
epsilon fraction of pairs.
And A prime is a decent size it.
All right.
So before we try to prove this,
let me ask a question to people.
So question, Can we just
take A prime to be all of A?
So then we would
just keep this part.
Is it plausible that
the number of paths
is at least an epsilon fraction
of the average most of the time?
It doesn't sound so crazy.
Is it possible that
that's always true?
Yeah, so the question is, what's
the maximum that this could be?
The maximum it could
be is B because there
are paths that
start at a1, they'll
go across to somebody in b.
They'll come back to a2.
So they're at most b.
So there's a decent
amount of range there.
And that is important.
Oh, the answer to
this question is no.
And here's an example.
Yeah, was there a comment?
AUDIENCE: And then could you
maybe have two points in A
connect them by a
every point in B,
and then every other point
in a is not very connected?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, OK.
So the suggestion was
I take two points in A
and I connect them to
all the points in B.
And then the rest of them
are not very connected.
Now two of them
might not be enough,
but it will take a few of them.
Here is B. Here this A.
This is a small piece.
I guess this could
be a small part of A.
And then over here, there are no
edges going out of there at all,
right.
So how big would
this have to be?
Well, we need a fraction 1 over
k of all the edges in our graph.
So this small part
of A would have
size 1 over k times all
of A. And now I have a 1
over k fraction
of all the edges.
So if I pick a1
and a2 in here, I
have a ton of
paths between them.
But if either one
of them is out here,
there are no paths between them.
And this set is actually
much bigger than that set.
So for almost all
the pairs in A,
there are no paths between them.
So this is a counterexample.
Good.
And there's a second
counterexample.
So in this counterexample,
the suspicious feature
is that these vertices have way
fewer edges than those vertices.
Could I also make
a counter example
where every vertex on both
sides has the same degree?
Yes, you can.
And it works by
dividing into clumps.
So I have a first clump.
I have all the edges in here.
And then I have a second clump.
And I have all the edges here.
And so on.
So if you do this and you have
k clumps of the same size,
then you'll see you have about
1 over k of all the edges.
And then if you pick a1
and a2, if you pick them
in different clumps, then there
are no paths between them.
If you pick them in the same
clump, there are lots of paths.
So because of
these two examples,
we cannot just take A
prime to be A. All right.
So we have to understand,
we need to pick A prime.
And now let's think about how
are we going to pick A prime.
And in both these examples, the
way to find a plausible A prime
is to pick some b and then
look at its neighborhood.
So here I pick some b and
I look at its neighborhood.
That's the set.
So this should be A prime right?
And here I pick some b anywhere,
and I look at its neighborhood.
And this is a reasonable
choice for A prime.
So we will take A prime
to be the neighborhood
of b for some b.
So now, so let me
make a definition.
I'll say a pair a1, a2
is called epsilon bad
if the number of paths
from a1 to A2 of length 2
is smaller than our
threshold there.
All right.
So the main thing we
have to think about
is I'm going to pick
different b's and look
at their neighborhoods.
And for each
neighborhood, I want
to count how many
bad pairs there are.
So BP epsilon of B is the
number of pairs a1, a2
that are both in the
neighborhood of b, so that a1,
a2 is epsilon bad.
All right.
So we'd like to know
about how big that is.
And the easiest thing to
compute is its expectation.
So lemma, the expectation over
B of the size of this thing
is not too crazy.
So let's see what that means.
So this is at most
epsilon fraction K
to the minus 2 A squared.
All right.
So let's digest this.
So we'll prove, of course.
But let's digest
the right-hand side.
So these bad pairs,
they're sitting
in just the set of all pairs.
So for reference, we
should think about how big
is the set of all pairs.
So let's take the expected
value over b of just the size
of its neighborhood squared.
That's at least K to
the minus 2 A squared.
This has an easy proof
that we'll do in a second.
All right.
So if you compare these,
you see that the fraction
of epsilon bad pairs is
at most a small fraction
of the total pairs.
Fraction of epsilon bad pairs
is at most epsilon, on average.
And that's good.
That's the thing
we want to prove.
We want to prove there's
only about an epsilon
fraction of bad pairs.
So let's call this
lemma P1 and lemma P2.
This one is real easy.
So I can keep it on this board.
And then we'll
prove lemma P1 which
is the most important thing.
So Lemma P2 proof, if I take
the sum on b of N of b squared.
When you see this, what
does it make you want to do?
Actually, we already did it.
So this is the sum on b N
of b quantity squared over
the size of B. That's at least
C inverse A B all squared over
k to the minus 2 a squared B.
And to turn the sum into
an average, we divide by B,
by the size of B [INAUDIBLE].
Actually we could say
an even simpler thing.
So what's the average
size of just N of B?
The average size of
N of B is exactly
K inverse times the size of
A. And so by Cauchy-Schwarz,
then if you square
it, it's at least
So the heart of the
matter for this lemma
is that the expected
number of bad pairs
is a lot less than the
expected number of total pairs.
So let's prove this lemma.
All right.
So proof of Lemma
P1, so again, let's
think about the sum on B of
the size of BP epsilon of b.
All right.
So this is a set
of pairs a1, a2,
so this is a number of things.
This is a double
counting argument.
It's a number of a1, a2, and
b, so that a few things hold.
So first of all, we have
this connection pattern.
And also a1 and
a2 are bad, which
means the number of
paths from a1 to a2
is at most epsilon
k to the minus 2 B.
All right.
So how should we count this?
Initially, we put
the B on the outside.
But to count this
quantity, it's a lot easier
to pick a1 and a2 first, because
then after we fix a1 and a2,
we're counting how many
b's we can put there.
And this hypothesis is just a
bound on the number of b's that
go there.
So this is less than A squared.
Pick any a1 and a2.
And then if a1 and a2
obey this condition,
there are at most this many
choices for B. And that's it.
Now I should convert
this sum to an average
by dividing by B. Then what's
left is epsilon K to the minus 2
A squared.
So we are now almost
done proving this lemma
about paths of length 2.
And I can fit the rest
of it in the little space
under the statement
of the lemma.
So on average, N of b is
pretty big my lemma 2.
On average, N of b
is bigger than this.
So proof, A prime is going
to be N of n for some b.
And on average, this
true because of lemma P1.
So we just need to be a little
careful about how exactly
to combine these two things.
And the way to do it is to
look at the average value of N
of b squared minus 1
over 2 epsilon times
the number of bad pairs.
So why do we combine things by
taking a linear combination?
We do that because that's nice.
Because of linearity
of expectation,
I can compute this directly
from the two lemmas computing
these things individually.
So that's why we'd
want to add them.
And what do we get?
Well, just plugging in the
bounds from lemma P1 and lemma
P2, we get that this is at
least 1/2 half K to the minus 2
A squared.
So now I choose b so that
N of b squared minus 1
over 2 epsilon BP epsilon
of b is greater than
or equal to its mean.
And I set A prime
to be this N of b.
All right.
And then I claim we can read off
the two things we care about.
The first thing we care about
is that N of b is pretty big.
So we can ignore
this negative thing.
N of b squared is
at least this big.
And so N of b is
at least around k
inverse A. That is
bullet point one.
And bullet point two is that
there are only a small fraction
of bad pairs a1, a2.
Well, for this thing
is positive, so 1
over this one I'll write down.
So we get the
number of bad pairs
is at most-- bring
this over here
and multiply, 2 epsilon times
the number of total pairs.
Only a 2 epsilon fraction
of the total pairs are bad.
That's this statement.
Any questions or comments
about this lemma?
AUDIENCE: So at the
end, all the A's
we choose are the
neighbors of one b?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, that's right.
So our set A prime is just
the set of neighbors of one b.
That's right.
Yeah, maybe at
the end, we'll try
to look back over the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
theorem and the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem,
the conclusion is there
exists A prime and B prime,
so that A prime plus
B prime is small.
And it's a natural
question, like who
are A prime plus B prime.
How do we find them?
This one I actually
probably should
have name something different.
This is not the final
A prime in the end
of Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
It's a stepping stone.
But we can keep track
of it along the way
and see, how do we find
A prime and B prime.
So here, most of
the pairs are good.
And we're going to upgrade
that in a trivial way.
If you fix a1, we could ask
whether most of the a2 are good.
And that's not
necessarily going to work.
There could be a few bad
a1's where many a2's are bad,
but we just cross them out and
make A prime a bit smaller,
and then we could say for every
a1, most of the a2's are good.
So let me write that down.
So I think this is the
best thing that I know how
to say about paths of length 2.
OK, so let me call this lemma
2 for paths of length 2.
So if x is in A cross
B, the size of X
is at least K inverse A B
and epsilon is bigger than 0.
Then there exists A2 in A
so that it's pretty big.
Not quite as big as
before, but I don't know,
1/4 K inverse A. And for every a
and a2, a fraction of 1 minus--
it won't be 1 minus 2 epsilon,
but maybe 1 minus 10 epsilon
times A2 Of a2.
Let me say it this way.
At most, 10 epsilon times the
size of A2 little a2 and A2,
there are at most there, so
that the pair little a1, a2, is
epsilon bad.
OK, so proof sketch is just
use the previous lemma.
And A2 is a prime.
Take away the A's that have
too many bad neighbors.
Yeah, actually, let me
write this in a better way.
And then I can draw
the picture of it.
So for every in A our set,
we can break up the set
as a bad part with a good part.
And what's the feature of each
of these, the bad part is small.
And what's good
about the good part?
The good part, there are
many paths from a to a2
in the good part.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: a comma
a2 is epsilon bad?
or it's a1?
LAWRENCE GUTH: This
a comma a2, correct.
So this is the final
word in today's story
about what we can say
about paths of length 2.
And now we're going to
bootstrap that and say something
even better about paths of
length 3, which is the main one.
Now we can prove the key lemma.
OK there's a little
bit at the beginning.
There is one example that was
mentioned earlier that there
might be a few elements
in A that are in no edges
or in very few edges, and it's
helpful to just eliminate them
from the beginning.
It's easy to reduce to the
case that doesn't happen.
So step one, so A1 is defined
to be the set of and a and A
so that the number
of edges from A to B,
let me see how I wrote that.
Oh Yeah.
That's just the size of
the neighborhood of A.
The size of the
neighborhood of A
is at least a small fraction
of the typical value.
This is the average value of
the size of the neighborhood.
We get rid of the
guys who have way
below average
number of neighbors.
And then it's straightforward
to check that.
So if I write X of A
prime, B prime that's
defined to be the set of pairs
a, b and A prime cross B prime
and in X.
So if I take the
edges X from A1 to B,
that is still most of the edges.
And also since I removed--
A1 comma B-- since I
removed low density edges,
now the typical
density has gone up.
So this is still true.
So basically, without
loss of generality,
I can assume that all the
edges have a decent size.
All right.
So next I use Lemma 2.
And it tells me that I
have this set A2 in A that
has this good
property, and A prime
is just going to be this A2.
All right.
So here's my A2.
This is A2.
And maybe there's some
more of A up here.
And if I pick a
particular a in here,
then I can break this
up into a small bad part
and a big good part.
The bad part is small.
And for the good
part, there are lots
of edges to the good part,
which I'll illustrate like this.
So now I would
like to choose a B.
I'd like to choose
B prime in B. I'm
make some more vertices here.
So over here is B. Who
should I include in B prime?
And I want to know that
if I start in any A,
I have many paths of length
3 to everybody in B prime.
Now, one thing that's a bit
tricky is that as I vary A,
G of A and B of A
aren't going to change,
and I don't know
much about them.
But it seems like a good
idea to take vertices B that
have a lot of edges to A2.
And if vertex B
has no edges to A2,
this is not going to be helpful.
So that's how we're
going to define B prime.
B prime is the set of b
in B with the property
that the number of
edges from B to A prime
is at least 20 epsilon
times the size of A prime.
All right.
Now, let's compare that with
what we know about here.
We know that the bad set
of a is at most 10 epsilon
times the size of A prime.
So this was selected
to be bigger than that.
So now I can say every A and
A prime and B and B prime,
the number of paths of length
3 from A to B is at least--
OK, I start in A.
Then for every good a,
I can have a lot of
paths to that good a.
So it's at least
that was epsilon K
to the minus 2 B. That's
how many paths I have
to a good a times the size of N
of b intersected with the grid
a's, the guys that
were good for a.
So if I look at the guys
that are good for a,
they neighbor b, so here's b.
This is good for a,
and they neighbor b.
Actually, let me do this.
So this is b.
These guys here are good
for a and they neighbor b.
And there are pretty many
paths to each guy that's good.
And then from here,
I can get to b.
And then this is
bigger than epsilon K
to the minus 2 B times--
well, there are at least
20 epsilon A prime guys
and N of b intersected
A. Let's do this.
N of b intersected A prime
minus the number of bad guys.
And then this whole thing
is at least 10 epsilon
times the size of A.
So the key point
is that I'm looking
at b's that have a lot of edges
to A prime, many more than the
size of the bad set.
So there's still lots of
edges that go to the good set.
So I put this together.
This is like epsilon squared
K to the minus to d A.
So A prime is also
about the size of A.
A prime is greater
than k inverse A.
We have something like this.
We're not done yet because we
haven't proven that B prime,
we haven't proven
that it's non-empty.
We need to prove
that it's pretty big.
But for each a in A
prime and b and B prime
we do have a lot of edges.
We do have the right
number of edges.
We also have to choose epsilon.
But as long as I choose epsilon
to be 1 over a power of k,
that will fit the bill of
what we're trying to prove.
So the last thing is to
check that B prime is
pretty big, or a
little more carefully
to check that there's still
a lot of edges between
and A prime B prime.
OK.
So last step, we have to
check that the number of edges
from A prime to B
prime is at least K
to the minus O of 1 times
the original number of edges.
Or you could put times A
B, but those are the same.
All right.
So remember we proved earlier
that A prime is at least around
1 over K times A.
And we also know,
so why did we do this
pruning at the beginning?
A prime is contained in A1.
We did this initial pruning.
So Na is greater than 1/10
M k inverse B for every
a in A prime, which is in A.
So they're all pretty big.
So there are lots of
edges that leave A prime.
So the number of
edges between A prime
and all of B, that's at least
K to the minus 2 times AB.
Now, to make B
prime, B prime are
the guys that have pretty
many edges to A prime.
So we're going to
cross out the guys that
have very few edges to A prime.
So if I count edges from A
prime to B, take away B prime,
so each one of these has only
20 epsilon edges to A prime.
So that's at most sorry 20
epsilon A prime edges times B.
So that's less than
20 epsilon A B. OK,
now we have paused about
when to choose epsilon.
We need it to be at
least some small power,
some K to the minus O of 1.
But we can make it
small enough that this
is way bigger than this.
So we now choose epsilon to
be, say, 1 over a million times
K to the minus 2.
And what that tells us is
that the number of edges
from A prime to the
complement of B prime
is way smaller than the number
of edges from A prime to B.
So the conclusion
is that the number
of edges from A
prime to B prime is
about the same as
the number of edges
from A prime to B, which is at
least K to the minus O of 1.
So we have checked
the last thing.
We still have a lot of edges.
OK.
Do people have any last
questions or comments
about this proof?
OK.
I have some last picture
questions or comments
about this proof.
So this proof is not that
hard and not that long,
but it's clever.
And I think it came as
a surprise to people.
And it certainly is
surprising to me.
So first of all, we
have this problem
about additive combinatorics.
And there are different
tools like Fourier analysis
is very well suited to
additive combinatorics.
So you can think of it as
something about convolutions
and Fourier analysis
doesn't seem to help
much to prove this thing.
And then we have this graph.
This graph, you think of
it as an adjacency matrix.
And if you want to count paths
from a1 to a2 you've taken,
so the adjacency matrix
is A. We took A, A star.
If you want to take paths
of length 3, It's A, A star,
A. So this is a theorem
about powers of a matrix.
So you might think that
linear algebra would be
helpful to prove this theorem.
I thought about that.
I could totally be
missing something,
but as far as I can
see, linear algebra
is not helpful to
prove this theorem
about the powers of a matrix.
And on the other hand, this
elementary double counting,
clever, but elementary double
counting and graph theory
really makes it work.
So that's something that
I find rather surprising.
I mentioned last time that this
theorem is really used a lot.
It's worth knowing about.
It's important.
And so hopefully, you've
seen a little bit of that.
But as the class
goes on, actually, we
might have some
more time to comment
on how this
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem.
When I first saw it, it
seemed a little bit technical.
There's two at first, rather
similar sounding ways a set
of having additive structure.
And they're related
to each other.
But this is an extremely
useful and important thing.
And we talked about it, but
we'll keep talking about it.